# protoc-gen-gorm

### [Chinese Documentation](./README-zh_CN.md)

### Purpose

A protobuf (https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers/) compiler plugin
designed to simplify the API calls needed to perform simple object persistence
tasks. This is currently accomplished by creating a secondary .pb.gorm.go file
which contains sister objects to those generated in the standard .pb.go file
satisfying these criteria:

- Go field decorators/tags can be defined by option in the .proto file for
GORM/SQL
- There are options for dropping fields from the PB object, or adding additional
fields (not generally recommended, as it reduces clarity of .proto file)
- Converters between PB version and ORM version of the objects are included
- Hook interfaces allow for custom application logic

### Prerequisites

#### 1. Protobuf Compiler

The protobuf compiler (protoc) is required.

[Official instructions](https://github.com/google/protobuf#protocol-compiler-installation)

[Abbreviated version](https://github.com/grpc-ecosystem/grpc-gateway#installation)

#### 2. Golang Protobuf Code Generator

Get the golang protobuf code generator:

```
go get -u github.com/golang/protobuf/protoc-gen-go
```

#### 3. Vendored Dependencies

Retrieve and install the vendored dependencies for this project with [dep](https://github.com/golang/dep):

```
dep ensure
```

### Installation

To use this tool, install it from code with `make install`, `go install` directly,
or `go get github.com/infobloxopen/protoc-gen-gorm`.

### Usage

Once installed, the `--gorm_out=.` or `--gorm_out=${GOPATH}src`
option can be specified in a protoc command to generate the .pb.gorm.go files.

Any message types with the `option (gorm.opts).ormable = true` will have the
following autogenerated:
- A struct with ORM compatible types and the "ORM" suffix
- GORM [tags](http://gorm.io/docs/models.html#Supported-Struct-tags) built from
the field options `[(gorm.field).tag = {..., tag: value, ...}]`.
- A {PbType}.ToORM and {TypeORM}.ToPB function
- Additional, unexposed fields added from the `option (gorm.opts) = {include: []}`,
  either of a built-in type e.g. `{type: "int32", name: "secret_key"}`, or an
  imported type, e.g. `{type: "StringArray", name: "array", package:"github.com/lib/pq"}`.
- Barebones C/U/R/D/L handlers that accept the protobuf versions (as from
  an API call), a context (used with the multiaccount option and for collection
  operators https://github.com/infobloxopen/atlas-app-toolkit#collection-operators),
  and a gorm.DB then perform the basic operation on the DB with the object
- Interface hooks for before and after each conversion that can be implemented
  to add custom handling.

Any services with the `option (gorm.server).autogen = true` will have basic grpc server generated:

- For service methods with names starting with `Create|Read|Update|Delete`
generated implementation will call basic CRUD handlers.
- For other methods `return &MethodResponse{}, nil` stub is generated.

For CRUD methods to be generated correctly you need to follow specific conventions:
- Request messages for Create and Update methods should have an Ormable Type
  in a field named `payload`, for Read and Delete methods an `id` field is
  required. Nothing is required in the List request.
- Response messages for Create, Read, and Update require an Ormable Type in a
  field named `result` and for List a repeated Ormable Type named `results`.
- Delete methods require the `(gorm.method).object_type` option to indicate
  which Ormable Type it should delete, and has no response type requirements.

To customize the generated server, embed it into a new type and override any
desired functions.

If conventions are not met stubs are generated for CRUD methods. As seen in the
[feature_demo/demo_service](example/feature_demo/demo_service.proto) example.

To leverage DB specific features, specify the DB engine during generation using
the `--gorm_out="engine={postgres,...}:{path}"`. Currently only Postgres has
special type support, any other choice will behave as default.

The generated code can also integrate with the grpc server gorm transaction middleware provided
in the [atlas-app-toolkit](https://github.com/infobloxopen/atlas-app-toolkit#middlewares)
using the service level option `option (gorm.server).txn_middleware = true`.

### Examples

Example .proto files and generated .pb.gorm.go files are included in the
'example' directory. The [user](user/user.proto) file contains model examples
from [GORM](http://gorm.io/docs/) documentation, the [feature_demo/demo_types](feature_demo/demo_types.proto)
demonstrates the type handling and multi_account functions, and the
[feature_demo/demo_service](feature_demo/demo_service.proto) shows the
service autogeneration.

Running `make example` will recompile all these test proto files, if you want
to test the effects of changing the options and fields.

### Supported Types

Within the proto files, the following types are supported:
- standard primitive types `uint32`, `uint64`, `int32`, `int64`, `float`,
  `double`, `bool`, `string` map to the same type at ORM level
- [google wrapper types](https://github.com/golang/protobuf/blob/master/ptypes/wrappers/wrappers.proto)
 `google.protobuf.StringValue`, `.BoolValue`, `.UInt32Value`, `.FloatValue`, etc.
 map to pointers of the internal type at the ORM level, e.g.
  `*string`, `*bool`, `*uint32`, `*float`
- [google timestamp type]((https://github.com/golang/protobuf/blob/master/ptypes/timestamp/timestamp.proto)
 `google.protobuf.Timestamp` maps to `time.Time` type at the ORM level
- custom wrapper types `gorm.types.UUID` and `gorm.types.UUIDValue`, which wrap
  strings and convert to a `uuid.UUID` and `*uuid.UUID` at the ORM level,
  from https://github.com/satori/go.uuid. A null or missing `gorm.types.UUID`
  will become a ZeroUUID (`00000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000000`) at the ORM
  level.
- custom wrapper type `gorm.types.JSONValue`, which wraps a string in protobuf
  containing arbitrary JSON and converts to `postgres.Jsonb` GORM type
  (https://github.com/jinzhu/gorm/blob/master/dialects/postgres/postgres.go#L59)
  if Postgres is the selected DB engine, otherwise it is currently dropped.
- custom wrapper type `gorm.types.InetValue`, which wraps a string and will
  convert to the `types.Inet` type at ORM level, which uses the golang `net.IPNet`
  type to hold an ip address and mask, IPv4 and IPv6 compatible, with the scan
  and value functions necessary to write to DBs. Like JSONValue, currently
  dropped if DB engine is not Postgres
- types can be imported from other .proto files within the same package (protoc
  invocation) or between packages. All associations can be generated properly
  within the same package, but cross package only the belongs-to and many-to-many
  will work.
- some repeated types can be automatically handled for Postgres by github.com/lib/pq, and
  as long as the engine is set to postgres then to/from mappings will be created (see the
  example called [example/postgres_arrays/postgres_arrays.proto](example/postgres_arrays/postgres_arrays.proto)):
  - []bool: pq.BoolArray
  - []float64: pq.Float64Array
  - []int64: pq.Int64Array
  - []string: pq.StringArray

### Associations

The plugin supports the following GORM [associations](http://gorm.io/docs/):

- Belongs-To
- Has-One
- Has-Many
- Many-To-Many

Note: polymorphic associations are currently not supported.

Association is defined by adding a field of some ormable message type(either single or repeated).

```golang
message Contact {
    option (gorm.opts).ormable = true;
    uint64 id = 1;
    string name = 2;
    repeated Email emails = 3;
    Address home_address = 4;
}
```

Has-One is a default association for a single message type.

```golang
message Contact {
    option (gorm.opts).ormable = true;
    uint64 id = 1;
    string first_name = 2;
    string middle_name = 3;
    string last_name = 4;
    Address address = 5;
}

message Address {
    option (gorm.opts).ormable = true;
    string address = 1;
    string city = 2;
    string state = 3;
    string zip = 4;
    string country = 5;
}
```

Set `(gorm.field).belongs_to` option on the field in order to define Belongs-To.

```golang
message Contact {
    option (gorm.opts).ormable = true;
    uint64 id = 1;
    string first_name = 2;
    string middle_name = 3;
    string last_name = 4;
    Profile profile = 5 [(gorm.field).belongs_to = {}];
}

message Profile {
    option (gorm.opts).ormable = true;
    uint64 id = 1;
    string name = 2;
    string notes = 3;
}
```

Has-Many is a default association for a repeated message type.

```golang
message Contact {
    option (gorm.opts).ormable = true;
    uint64 id = 1;
    string first_name = 2;
    string middle_name = 3;
    string last_name = 4;
    repeated Email emails = 5;
}

message Email {
    option (gorm.opts).ormable = true;
    string address = 1;
    bool is_primary = 2;
}
```

Set `(gorm.field).many_to_many` option on the field in order to define Many-To-Many.

```golang
message Contact {
    option (gorm.opts).ormable = true;
    uint64 id = 1;
    string first_name = 2;
    string middle_name = 3;
    string last_name = 4;
    repeated Group groups = 5 [(gorm.field).many_to_many = {}];
}

message Group {
    option (gorm.opts).ormable = true;
    uint64 id = 1;
    string name = 2;
    string notes = 3;
}
```

For each association type, except Many-To-Many, foreign keys pointing to primary keys(association keys) are automatically created
if they don't exist in proto messages, their names correspond to GORM [default](http://gorm.io/docs/belongs_to.html) foreign key names.
GORM association tags are also automatically inserted.

#### Customization

- For each association type you are able to override default foreign key and association key by setting `foreignkey` and `association_foreignkey` options.
- For each association type you are able to override default behavior of creating/updating the record. It's references can be created/updated depending on
`association_autoupdate`, `association_autocreate` and `association_save_reference` options. Check out
[official association docs](http://gorm.io/docs/associations.html) for more information.
- For each association type you are able to set `preload` option. Check out
[GORM](http://gorm.io/docs/preload.html#Auto-Preloading) docs.
- By default when updating child associations are wiped and replaced. This functionality can be switched to work the same way gorm handles this see [GORM]https://gorm.io/docs/associations.html this is done by adding one of the gorm association handler options, the options are `append` ([GORM]https://gorm.io/docs/associations.html#Append-Associations), `clear` ([GORM]https://gorm.io/docs/associations.html#Clear-Associations) and `replace` ([GORM]https://gorm.io/docs/associations.html#Replace-Associations).
- For Has-Many you are able to set `position_field` so additional field is created if it doesn't exist in proto message to maintain association ordering.
Corresponding CRUDL handlers do all the necessary work to maintain the ordering.
- For automatically created foreign key and position field you're able to assign GORM tags by setting `foreignkey_tag` and `position_field_tag` options.
- For Many-To-Many you're able to override default join table name and column names by setting `jointable`, `jointable_foreignkey` and
`association_jointable_foreignkey` options.

Check out [user](example/user/user.proto) to see a real example of associations usage.

### Limitations

Currently only proto3 is supported.

This project is currently in development, and is expected to undergo "breaking"
(and fixing) changes

## Contributing

Pull requests are welcome!

Any new feature should include tests for that feature.

Before pushing changes, run the tests with:
```
make gentool-test
```
This will run the tests in a docker container with specific known versions of dependencies.

Before the tests run, they generate code. Commit any new and modified generated code as part of your pull request.
